so in reading Cicero today were reading
the words of someone who is frantically
trying to convince his audience and
trying to convince himself that the
glory of Rome still lies in the future
when tragically he already knows within
his own lifetime the glory of Rome
already lies in us
it's very poorly written the author
works very very hard to make his ideas
in order all of the moments when
Cicero's an author is trying to do the
most earnest and the most awe-inspiring
to summon up this great sense of
religiosity and of historical depth of
importance is when today it is it is
just laughable he's not offering it
democracy he's offering in the name of
democracy rubber stamped on - that's
really absolutely
for a lot of you this may sound like
comes out of left field there's a
there's a politically loaded phrase
right of the left field if we're gonna
have a sincere discussion about the
legacy and influence of Cicero I think
we have to start by asking what is the
value of an aristocracy what is the role
of aristocracy in our society supposed
to be and then what did it ever mean to
these historical authors so to give you
guys a quick recap Cicero is one of the
most influential political philosophers
in the history of the world and today
nobody reads him it's kind of
mind-blowing we had real difficulty
finding a copy at the library we went to
the library you will have difficulty
even finding a consistent title for this
book
it's normally titled something like on
the Republic on the Roman Republic it
could be on the state or on the nature
of government but there are a few
different kind of titles circulating and
you know like that was true in the
Middle Ages for major works by like
Plato and Aristotle there'd be more than
one title but then at some point in the
scholarship we settled on a standard
modern a title but you're not not just
standard in English but normally the
same title be used in all European
languages so I think everyone knows this
is what's the most important work by
Cicero it's one of the most important
works in history of Western civilization
would it be too much to say there's a
kind of embarrassment about it I had the
very strange experience that I was
starting to read Cicero at the time when
I had just been studying the history of
the English Civil War and it was
astonishing to read Cicero Cicero's
rationale Cicero's philosophy of
government being used word for word
perfectly in justifying basically what
we would call the Divine Right of Kings
in British history the debate between
the British King and Parliament
ultimately about whether or not the king
should be decapitated although in
principle I think at that stage of the
trial
it hadn't quite come to that point yes
it was more of a broad debate about what
should be the role of King with what
should be the Royal Society and what
should be the limited role of democracy
and role in the British people so at
that time just to stick with this with
this example the King of England
employed the arguments treated of Cicero
that what his government represented his
form of ruling England what he
represented was not monarchy it was a
balance of the three essential aspects
of government monarchy aristocracy and
democracy now I really feel that Cicero
is the first great example we have of a
completely insincere demagogue writing
propaganda that quite intentionally
abuses the name of democracy or gives
you a sham democracy with absolutely no
sincere interest in the people having
any say in in government put it that way
now in our own times I remember this
with one of my ex-girlfriends especially
she'd always be confused and she would
think North Korea was South Korea
because you know the communist countries
always have democracy in their names you
know
People's Democratic Republic of Korea
chuckle well that must mean South Korea
cuz that's the that's the Democratic no
no no no no no Laos still communist to
this day still with guys were the Lao
People's Democratic Republic right and
back in the day this was no joke back in
the 1980s
you know communists and and fellow
travelers and Fabian socialist did all
say like well how do you define
democracy anyway yeah right so there was
a lot of really insincere propagandistic
one-sided selective definitions of
democracy during my youth in the the era
of the kind of fever pitch contest
between capitalism and communism and
very very little of that discussion was
sincere to give to give a contrasting
example by the way in the autobiography
of Richard Nixon Presidents Day
it's an autobiography hilariously titled
no more Viet Nam's meaning no more wars
like the Vietnam War you know he he
remarks well a lot of people said that
when we had this colony when we occupied
when we dominated part of Vietnam it
also wasn't a legitimate democracy and
he responds to this criticism and
paraphrasing of course he said well when
we controlled Vietnam there was some
democracy and there were some elections
you know maybe they were badly flawed
maybe they were legitimate so but after
the Communists took over there there
were none that's about as honest as
Richard Nixon gets that's about that
particular historical figure that's
Donnison is gonna get with you so my
point being on both sides the Cold War
there was a lot of very insincere
manipulation of the constant democracy
now I disagree with Aristotle about the
nature of democracy I disagree with
Plato about the nature democracy I
probably disagree with Socrates about
didn't truth be told we don't have that
much to deal with definitely lucidity
I have more respect for the acidities
than maybe any other single author from
from ancient Athens I totally disagree
with him about the core issue democracy
but I think all of those guys were being
completely sincere and what Cicero is
engaging in is a fabrication so of those
three elements monarchy inter-service
it's a monarchy anarchy and that would
be a different a different philosophy
government for a monarchy anarchy and
democracy hmm
monarchy aristocracy and democracy right
so I opened this by saying if we're
going to take Cicero's contribution to
history seriously what we really have to
ask is what is the positive contribution
of the aristocrats to society now today
in the United States of America there
are there were no aristocrats in the
formal sense but there is a millionaire
class there was a billionaire class and
I think everyone left or right really
assumes that those people are basically
social parasites
that the majority of their wealth is
just devoted to their own entertainment
and their own self-indulgence they don't
have any particular commitment to
national well-being that they're not
they are not the leaders of society put
it that way that it's extraordinary and
exceptional and to be celebrated if any
of them as a spirit of public service
and self-sacrifice we expect
millionaires to live the way Donald
Trump lived in the 1980s which again I
can remember very well he was on the
cover of Playboy magazine he utterly
flagrantly represented himself to the
public as a reckless thick less
self-indulgent millionaire who cheated
on his wife while going skiing and was
photographed you know cheating on his
wife this is a famous event at the time
um you know there was absolutely no
pretense of him having shall we say any
Spartan values let alone any Athenian
values this is the assumption we have of
them the 21st century equivalent to the
aristocratic class and now I think if
you go to a country where technically
aristocrats still exist the Netherlands
England and you ask people what do you
think about aristocrats and what is
their positive role in society you're
gonna get a lot of confused silence you
know what so what people who just happen
to own land because their ancestors were
wealthy why would I expect anything
positive oh well in England they still
fill the House of Lords like you know
they have two chambers of government
they're the equipment of the Congress
and the Senate their upper house the
equivalent of the Senate the House of
Lords those are all people who were in
there because of who their ancestors
were because they were born rich you
know so if you don't believe they have a
special role to play as leaders society
you have a very strange artifact of
exactly that was that king of England's
theory that his model of government
reconciled democracy aristocracy and
monarchy that it was all three in
balance that it was a hybrid government
which is what Cicero promises now
however if we go back to that era of the
English Civil War if we I think this is
one of the distinctive elements of
modernity in contrast to pre modernity
Middle Ages Renaissance etc
is very clear that the rule of the
aristocrat in pre-modern Europe was at
all times to prepare for war they would
breed horses they'd raise horses they'd
you know be stockpiling the munitions of
war they would be training in sword and
lance and they would be training the
peasants to fight with bow and arrow all
throughout England this is a standard
thing for centuries and centuries all of
the tallest men even from the small
towns and villages the peasants would be
recruited to be trained with the longbow
you had to be tall she's a home poet you
know all the tall men of England became
one woman why even when there was no war
well sooner or later they'd be a war
there'd be a war with France there be
war with Spain to be a civil war then
anyway constant military preparatory
Onis that was the role of the
aristocratic class historically in in
Europe so humble history of China or
history of Japan maybe there are some
other concepts there so in that sense
it's very clear he in the long centuries
of cicero's influence which were exactly
the centuries after the collapse of the
Roman Empire when people tried to look
back at Rome and say hey what was the
ideal of government what was the mode
organisation of government that made the
Roman Empire so successful including
obviously the thing just about the
material quality of life but also
military success you know managed to
unify such a huge area politically and
so on administrative success
bureaucratic success success in every
kind during the dark ages in English and
even into the Renaissance looking back
at what ancient Rome accomplished and
thinking how was it they did did this
and we're incapable of it we're this
bunch of tiny fragmentary Christian
states that all hate each other that can
barely scramble together to get
organized to fight off invasions from
the Mongols for example or what have you
you know why is it that we were just so
barely able to organize lunch now and
they looked to Cicero for that
inspiration that guidance
now what did Cicero think was the
positive role of aristocrats in society
I'll give you my original thesis here
which is completely based on silence
I think an honest reading of Cicero in
the context of Aristotle because in many
ways it's building on and respond you
are so I think that Cicero's real
implicit thesis is if you do not have a
system of government that is pleasing to
the aristocrats they will just take it
over anyway I think that's the real
honest truth is that he lived at a time
when the aristocrats in reality padel of
the power they had all the wealth they
had the means to it anytime to pose even
the emperor the emperor of Rome and
replace him with someone of their
choosing so you needed at all times
within Rome the reality of what Rome was
during his lifetime you needed a system
of government that was at all times
pandering to for lack of a better word
the aristocratic class and it was
basically out of fear that at ristic
rats would take away democracy or even
just take away shall we say professional
government and replace it with
dictatorship take away you know the the
trappings of you know a properly
organized constitutional republic
there's there's a late loaded term in
2019 did they take away your
constitutional republic and rule by by
other means because the aristocrats at
all times had the power to do that and
throughout Italy not necessarily just
within Rome they had lots of examples of
that all the time of where Stoke rats
directly taking over power now that is
an incredibly bleak view of democracy
that democracy is in a sense always held
hostage by the elite class of the
society you're living in and you're in
the position of like a hostage
negotiator trying to bargain barter for
trying to bargain for whatever the
conditions of the other classes will be
and that ultimately even the monarch who
is just one man or in Rome you know we
have titles like Emperor's and so on is
someone who is quite powerless compared
to the people who ultimately owned the
horses and organize and educate and
raise up the peasants and train them
with with bow and arrow okay so
conclusions on Cicero's Republic
it's a very poorly written work the
author works very very hard to make his
ideas immortal by throwing in a lot of
religious material that today is
incomprehensible and impossible to
sympathize with indeed it is tragicomic
to read the text today because all of
the moments when Cicero's an author is
trying to be the most earnest and the
most awe-inspiring to summon up this
great sense of religiosity and of
historical depth of importance is when
today it is it is just laughable and
then on the other hand when he is
dealing with politics the real questions
of politics political organization
democracy so on and so forth he is being
evasive he is being dishonest he is
trying to manipulate the audience in a
manner where if you're just kind of
taking notes on a sheet of graph paper
if you're even just like trying to draw
a diagram on graph paper of what this
system of government is like when he
promises you a balance of monarchy
aristocracy and democracy wait wait wait
so we're we're in the system is the
democracy can it's that easy to refute I
mean it's that obvious the nature of the
deception the fabric of lies that he's
not offering you democracy he's offering
you the name of democracy rubber stamped
on to what's really an absolutely
horrible system of government it's very
hard for anyone to accept was hard for
Cicero in his own life to accept and I
just mentioned we can't get into this
his own life was tragic the political
circumstances he was writing that book
in are tragic he was trying to be
optimistic about a Roman Empire that was
getting more and more dictatorial let's
put it that way less and less democratic
less and less of a real Constitution
vote even during his lifetime and after
he dies and only gets worse that already
when he's alive it seems like Rome's
glory days are behind them or at least
I've began to use a totally alien
concept in terms of like rule of law and
human rights and things like that that
Rome is getting worse and worse the
small role for democracy is disappearing
so in reading sister
today were reading the words of someone
who is frantically trying to convince
his audience and trying to convince
himself that the glory of Rome still
lies in the future when tragically he
already knows within his own lifetime
the glory of Rome already lies in the
past it is certainly mysterious it's not
that it's mysterious it is hard for
people to deal with today the idea that
Rome was quote-unquote
great just due to material circumstances
that the fact that the Roman Empire was
as successful as it was is just as
arbitrary and meaningless and brutal and
uninspiring as the fact that one dynasty
after another happened to win during a
certain period of the history of China
it's very difficult for Europeans to
study the history of Europe with that
level of detachment where they're even
willing to look at Rome as a phenomenon
as something immoral if not immoral as a
disaster rather than a triumph but to
really examine Cicero and the legacy of
his influence on Western European
civilization it is every bit as
sickening as studying Communist Party
documents that completely insincerely
try to convince you that the reason why
they're torturing people to death and
throwing them in prison for asking for
elections the reason why nobody can ever
have elections even though the
Constitution of China promises you
elections promises that everyone can
vote same with even Russia after Lenin's
Revolution 1917 the reason why they were
hunting down and murdering everyone who
participated in the elections that the
reason for that is democracy it's just
as sickening to to study the it the
original text and the influence of the
sham democracy that Cicero propounded as
it is to study the sham democracy of
historical communism